Lilongwe is the largest and capital city of Malawi with an estimated population of 1,077,116 for 2015. The city is located in the central region of Malawi, near the borders with Mozambique and Zambia, and it is an important economic and transportation hub for central Malawi.[2] It is named after the Lilongwe River.Lilongwe had existed for centuries as a small fishing village on the banks of the Lilongwe River. During British Colonial Rule, the settlement became an administrative center due to its strategic location. Formally founded in 1906[3] as a trading post, Lilongwe was officially recognized as a town in 1947.[4] After gaining independence, it increasingly developed into an important trading center in Malawi's central region. Its growth was encouraged when the country's former head of state, Hastings Kamuzu Banda, established it as Malawi's new capital city in 1975.[5] The last government offices have been relocated to Lilongwe in 2005.[6] The city's population is increasing rapidly, with an annual growth rate of 4.3%.[2]Lilongwe is governed by Lilongwe City Council, which is dominated by governing DPP.[1]Lilongwe is the seat of Malawi's Government and the parliament.Lilongwe is located on a plateau in Central Malawi, forming part of the East African Rift Valley situated at an altitude of 1,050 m (3,440 ft) above sea level, along Lilongwe River.Lilongwe features a humid subtropical climate that borders on a subtropical highland climate (Köppen: Cwa), with pleasantly warm summers and mild winters. Due to the altitude, temperatures are lower than would be expected for a city located in the tropics. Lilongwe features a short wet season that runs from December to March and a lengthy dry season that covers much of the remainder of the year, particularly June and July which are cooler than the rest of the year. However, the city sees heavy downpours during its rainy season, seeing around 200 millimetres (7.9 in) of rain in a month during the wettest months.Lilongwe is divided into a New and Old City. The former hosts hotels, embassies, governmental institutions and offices while the latter has markets, bus stations, cafes and restaurants. The modern shops of the City are contrasted by the street and walled markets of Old Town.[5]See also: Economy of MalawiWhile Blantyre is the commercial Capital of Malawi, Lilongwe's economy is dominated by the government and public institutions. Kanengo District in the north of the city is the main industrial area, where food processing, tobacco storage and sales, maize storage and other light industries take place. Finance, banking, retail trade, construction, transport, public administration, tourism, and tobacco manufacturing are the main economic activities in the city. 76 percent of Lilongwe's population live in informal settlements, while poverty stands at 25 percent and unemployment at 16 percent.[6] The civil service employs about 27 percent of all formal workers, while 40 percent work in the private sector and 2 percent are self-employed.[2]A variety of bars and night clubs offer opportunities for live music and parties.[8]See also: Malawian cuisineDue in part to the growth of the expatriate community and the increasing importance of tourism, the number of international restaurants has risen very rapidly over recent years. The city now offers a rich and internationalized diversity of cuisine, such as Chinese, Korean, Italian, and Indian food.[9]Lilongwe's Kamuzu International Airport (LLW) fields regular flights to Johannesburg, Addis Ababa, Nairobi, Lusaka and domestic services to Blantyre. The airport is located to the north of Lilongwe, approximately 20 kilometers from the City Centre.[10] The Airport serves as a hub for Malawian Airlines. Kamuzu International Airport replaced Lilongwe's old airport, 6 kilometers west of the City, in 1977.[citation needed]There are regular bus services from Lilongwe to Blantyre, Zomba, Kasungu and Mzuzu.[11]There is a rail service to Lilongwe. To the west the line runs towards Zambia, and to the east to Salima.[12]There are 38 private and 66 public primary schools with a total of 103,602 pupils as well as 29 secondary schools with 30,795 students in Lilongwe.[2]A new national stadium with a capacity of 40,000 is currently being constructed with the help of a $70 million loan form the Government of the People's Republic of China.[13] Lilongwe travel guide from Wikivoyage