Saint Peter Port is the capital of Guernsey as well as the main port. The population in 2001 was 16,488. In Guernésiais and in French, historically the official language of Guernsey, the name of the town and its surrounding parish is St Pierre Port. The "port" distinguishes this parish from Saint Pierre Du Bois.As well as being a parish, St. Peter Port is a small town consisting mostly of steep narrow streets and steps on the overlooking slopes. It is known that a trading post/town has existed here since before Roman times, the pre-Christian name of which has not survived into the modern era.The post code for addresses in this parish starts with GY1.People from St. Peter Port, were nicknamed "les Villais" (the townspeople) or "cllichards" in Guernésiais.St. Peter Port is located on the east coast of Guernsey. It borders St Sampson's in the north, The Vale in the north-west, St Andrew's in the west and St Martin's in the south.On the seaward side it faces Herm to the east, across the Little Russel, and Sark and Brecqhou even further east across the Big Russel between them and Herm. The Bréhon Tower sits in the Little Russel between St Peter Port and Herm.The land in the north and by the harbour is low lying but in the south, the land gets much higher (but not as high as St Martin's or the Forest). This means that there are quite a few cliffs on the coast between Havelet and Fermain.Vauvert Primary School has been in the town since 1909.St. Peter Port has an English Isthmian League club, Guernsey F.C. who play at Footes Lane.Saint Peter Port is subdivided into four cantons:[1]In addition, the islands of Herm and Jethou belong to the parish,[2] but are not part of any canton. They belong to Electoral district Saint Peter Port South.[3]The features of the town include:Castle Carey was built in 1840 for John Carey. It is a Gothic revival property, attributed to the architect John Wilson, who designed Elizabeth College and St James Concert Hall. It was briefly the residence of the Lieutenant Governor of the Bailiwick of Guernsey and hosted Queen Victoria and Prince Albert during their visit to Guernsey in 1859, and the Duke of Cambridge in 1862. Victor Hugo’s novel “Les Travailleurs de la Mer”, published in 1866 and dedicated to Guernsey, where he spent 15 years in exile, mentions Castle Carey. The castle stayed in the Carey family until William Wilfred Carey sold it in 1912.[4] During the Second World War, the Germans occupying Guernsey used Castle Carey as an officers’ club.The following main roads (listed from north-south) provide important links between St Peter Port and the other parishes:The following coastal roads (listed from north to south) are also very important as they provide access to the shops, carparks and the harbour:Blue Islands, a regional airline, has its head office in Saint Peter Port.[5]