1 French Land Register data, which excludes lakes, ponds, glaciers > 1 km² (0.386 sq mi or 247 acres) and river estuaries.Basse-Terre is the prefecture (capital city) of Guadeloupe, an overseas region and department of France located in the Lesser Antilles.[1] The city of Basse-Terre is located on Basse-Terre Island, the western half of Guadeloupe.Although it is the administrative capital, Basse-Terre is only the second largest city in Guadeloupe behind Pointe-à-Pitre. Together with its urban area it had 44,864 inhabitants in 2012 (11,534 of whom lived in the city of Basse-Terre proper).See Basse-Terre Island for the origin of the name Basse-Terre.The city was founded in 1643, in the mountainous section of Basse-Terre, one of the two islands which compose Guadeloupe. It was destroyed many times as a consequence of the Anglo-French wars. The fear around the eruption of La Grande Soufriere in 1976, led to the town's temporary evacuation. Today the town is quiet, with its French provincial atmosphere and colourful port life.Home of the noted writer of the Négritude movement, Paul Niger.In town is the Cathedral of Saint-Pierre-et-Saint-Paul, a 19th-century building which has a notable grey stone highlighted by white statues; many other colonial buildings; La place du Champ d'Arbaud, the main square and Le Jardin Pichon, the park adjoining to the south & the Zoological and Botanical Park lies on a 1,500-foot (460 m) hilltop garden on the banks of La Rivière-aux-Herbes. This is a reserve of the plants and animals of Guadeloupe.Basse-Terre lies at a transitional point between a tropical rainforest climate and a tropical monsoon climate. While Basse-Terre does feature a drier stretch from January through March, the town does not quite have a dry season month. The town’s driest month (February) sees on average roughly 60 mm of precipitation. A monthly precipitation average below 60 mm is considered dry season month. As is the norm with cities with these two climate types, Basse-Terre features relatively consistent temperatures throughout the year.